README.md, before:

# Intelligent Algorithm Selection for Recommender Systems: Meta-Learning via in-depth algorithm feature Engineering


## Requirements

To install all necessary packages, run:
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Pipeline execution
The experimental pipeline is controlled via `scripts/run_pipeline.py`. 
It consists of three seperate functions: ground-truth-generation, user and algorithm feature generation and meta-learning evaluation
1. Ground truth generation
2. User and algorithm feature generation
3. Meta-Learner training and evaluation

You can execute the entire pipeline from start to finish, or run specific steps by editing the main function at the bottom of the script.

**Note:** The full pipeline, especially the ground truth generation, can take several hours to complete.

## Feature Importance Experiment
To run the feature importance analysis, execute `scripts/feature_importance_analysis.py`


## Data

**Please Note:** Due to file size limitations, the raw datasets are not included in this repository.

### Data Setup

1.  Download the required raw datasets (e.g., MovieLens-1M, LastFM, etc.) from their original sources.
2.  Create a subdirectory for each dataset inside `/data/raw/`.
3.  Place the unzipped data files into their corresponding directories. The final structure should look like this:

    ```
    data/
    └── raw/
        ├── ml-1m/
        │   └── ratings.dat
        ├── lastfm/
        │   └── user_artists.dat
        ├── bookcrossing/
        │   └── BX-Book-Ratings.csv
        └── ... (and so on for the other datasets)
    ```
Then, run `data/preprocess.py` to run the preprocessing functions for all datasets.


### Data Flow

-   **Raw Datasets:** Must be placed in `/data/raw/<dataset_name>/` as described above.
-   **Processed Datasets:** Generated by `data/preprocess.py` and stored in `/data/processed/<dataset_name>/`.
-   **Ground Truth & User Features:** Generated by the pipeline and stored in `/results/meta_learning_data/`.
-   **Algorithm Features:** Generated by the pipeline and stored in `/results/algo_features/`.
-   **Conceptual Algorithm Features:** These are an exception, as they are not automatically generated but created manually. They are included in the repository.
-   **Final Analysis:** Summary tables and plots are saved to `/results/meta_learning_analysis/`.

Commit message:

Enhance README with thesis details and preprint link
Added thesis abstract and citation information to README.

README.md, after:

# Intelligent Algorithm Selection for Recommender Systems: Meta-Learning via in-depth algorithm feature Engineering
This repository contains the source code and experimental pipeline for the Bachelor's thesis by Jarne Mathi Decker, supervised by Prof. Dr. Joeran Beel at the University of Siegen.

---

### 📄 **Preprint**

A preprint of the thesis is available on arXiv. If you use this code or the findings in your research, please cite this preprint:

**https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.20134**

### **Abstract**

>The "No Free Lunch" theorem dictates that no single recommender algorithm is optimal for all users, creating a significant Algorithm Selection Problem. Standard meta-learning approaches aim to solve this by selecting an algorithm based on user features, but treat the fundamentally diverse algorithms themselves as equivalent, "black-box" choices. This thesis investigates the impact of overcoming this limitation by engineering a comprehensive feature set to explicitly characterize the algorithms themselves. We combine static code metrics, Abstract Syntax Tree properties, behavioral performance landmarks, and high-level conceptual features. We evaluate two meta-learners across five datasets: a baseline using only user features and our proposed model using both user and algorithm features. Our results show that the meta-learner augmented with algorithm features achieves an average NDCG@10 of 0.143, a statistically significant improvement of 11.7% over the Single Best Algorithm baseline (0.128). However, we found that the inclusion of algorithm features did not lead to an improvement in overall NDCG@10 over the meta learner using only user features (0.144). While adding algorithm features to the meta-learner did improve its Top-1 selection accuracy (+16.1%), this was counterbalanced by leading to a lower Top-3 accuracy (-10.7%). We conclude that for the per-user algorithm selection task in recommender systems, the predictive power of user features is overwhelmingly dominant. While algorithm features improve selection precision, unlocking their potential to boost overall performance remains a non-trivial challenge.
---

## Requirements

To install all necessary packages, run:
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Pipeline execution
The experimental pipeline is controlled via `scripts/run_pipeline.py`. 
It consists of three separate functions: ground-truth-generation, user and algorithm feature generation, and meta-learning evaluation
1. Ground truth generation
2. User and algorithm feature generation
3. Meta-Learner training and evaluation

You can execute the entire pipeline from start to finish, or run specific steps by editing the main function at the bottom of the script.

**Note:** The full pipeline, especially the ground truth generation, can take several hours to complete.

## Feature Importance Experiment
To run the feature importance analysis, execute `scripts/feature_importance_analysis.py`


## Data

**Please Note:** Due to file size limitations, the raw datasets are not included in this repository.

### Data Setup

1.  Download the required raw datasets (e.g., MovieLens-1M, LastFM, etc.) from their original sources.
2.  Create a subdirectory for each dataset inside `/data/raw/`.
3.  Place the unzipped data files into their corresponding directories. The final structure should look like this:

    ```
    data/
    └── raw/
        ├── ml-1m/
        │   └── ratings.dat
        ├── lastfm/
        │   └── user_artists.dat
        ├── bookcrossing/
        │   └── BX-Book-Ratings.csv
        └── ... (and so on for the other datasets)
    ```
Then, run `data/preprocess.py` to run the preprocessing functions for all datasets.


### Data Flow

-   **Raw Datasets:** Must be placed in `/data/raw/<dataset_name>/` as described above.
-   **Processed Datasets:** Generated by `data/preprocess.py` and stored in `/data/processed/<dataset_name>/`.
-   **Ground Truth & User Features:** Generated by the pipeline and stored in `/results/meta_learning_data/`.
-   **Algorithm Features:** Generated by the pipeline and stored in `/results/algo_features/`.
-   **Conceptual Algorithm Features:** These are an exception, as they are not automatically generated but created manually. They are included in the repository.
-   **Final Analysis:** Summary tables and plots are saved to `/results/meta_learning_analysis/`.
